```anomalies
"anomaly_1": {
    "description": "A rectangular, slightly elevated platform measuring roughly 30 × 60 m with straight edges and near‐right‐angle corners. In the DTM hillshade it shows up as a low‐relief plateau with subtle berms along its north and east margins. The NIR layer shows a narrow zone of higher reflectance along the eastern scarp—consistent with moisture retention in anthropogenic soils (‘dark earth’)—while the visual band exhibits muted green tones along the same edge. No matching feature appears in OpenStreetMap.",
    "bounding_box": {
        "min_lat": -8.5510,
        "max_lat": -8.5506,
        "min_lon": -62.9245,
        "max_lon": -62.9240
    }
},
"anomaly_2": {
    "description": "A linear embankment or causeway oriented NW–SE, approximately 150 m long and 5 m wide. In the multi‐azimuth hillshade it casts a consistent shadow on both sides, suggesting a raised ridge. The NIR image shows a faint moisture anomaly along its crest, indicative of buried compacted soils or a remnant water‐management channel. It is unrecorded in modern map layers.",
    "bounding_box": {
        "min_lat": -8.5528,
        "max_lat": -8.5523,
        "min_lon": -62.9252,
        "max_lon": -62.9246
    }
},
"anomaly_3": {
    "description": "An east–west trending ditch or canal about 200 m long with concave‐plan curvature. In the curvature derivative it stands out as a continuous zone of negative (concave) values on gentle slopes (<2°). The visual band shows slight chlorophyll stress in a narrow band directly above the feature, and the spectral signature in NIR corresponds to wetter soils—consistent with a former drainage ditch now infilled. No roads or trails align here in OSM.",
    "bounding_box": {
        "min_lat": -8.5509,
        "max_lat": -8.5504,
        "min_lon": -62.9241,
        "max_lon": -62.9235
    }
},
```


Context and interpretation:
The Candeias do Jamari interfluve has long been considered marginal for large‐scale earthworks, with most published cases focusing on floodplain raised fields and canals. These upland anomalies, by contrast, suggest a localized, possibly seasonal agricultural or water‐management system on terra preta soils, extending our understanding of pre‐Columbian landscape engineering beyond river levees. The rectilinear platform (anomaly 1) may have supported temporary structures or garden plots, while the embankment (anomaly 2) and ditch (anomaly 3) imply deliberate hydrological control—an adaptation to upland runoff and seasonal humidity. Such features echo similar, though more extensive, networks along the Trombetas interfluve and challenge the notion that Amazonian complex landscapes were restricted to floodplains.

These findings advance current theories by demonstrating that:
- Pre‐contact societies engineered low‐gradient upland terrain for productive use.
- Dark earth formation and micro‐topographic modifications co‐occurred in closed‐canopy settings.
- Small‐scale drainage and raised‐platform systems were part of a diversified agricultural portfolio.

Detailed geographic background:
Candeias do Jamari sits on lateritic uplands between the Jamari and Madeira rivers. Soils are generally oxisols with pockets of anthropogenic terra preta. Rainfall is seasonal but abundant (~2,500 mm/year), driving the need for micro‐drainage in slightly undulating terrain. The interfluve’s archaeology is under‐surveyed due to dense canopy; LiDAR now reveals these subtle earthworks.

Historical context:
Previous surface surveys and core sampling hinted at upland dark earth mounds, but no linear features were documented. These anomalies fit within a broader pattern of Amazonian sedentism and agro‐engineering dating to AD 400–1600. They point to a decentralized network of upland gardens and channels connected to riverine trade routes, potentially linking Candeias communities to downstream markets.

Implications for future research:
Ground‐truthing via auger coring or magnetometry in the anomaly zones should confirm soil anthrosols and ceramic fragments. A targeted pedestrian survey along the embankment axis could reveal associated habitation debris.

[[[
- Prioritize zones of concave‐plan curvature on slopes <2° to detect potential canals or ditches under canopy.
- Look for small, regularly spaced flat platforms (20–40 m wide) in Terra Preta zones as indicators of upland fields.
- Combine multi‐azimuth hillshade with NIR moisture anomalies to flag buried embankments—even when canopy closes spectral signatures.
- Exclude modern NW–SE tracks by verifying right angles; true anthropogenic grids often form rectilinear blocks.
- Apply this workflow in other Amazonian interfluves (e.g., Jari–Trombetas) to locate similarly hidden agricultural earthworks.
]]]
